build thank you for joining today's
session
five bad hab data habits that lead to
costly decisions
i'm going to go over a few quick
housekeeping items before i pass it over
to our speakers today
as many of you know um you've already
probably been to a few sessions
um our sessions you can view our
sessions a few different ways many of
you are in our event platform which
we're really hoping you're enjoying and
all the networking opportu
opportunities there to submit a question
in that event platform you can simply go
into the question feature
on the right rail of your screen and
drop that question and
the team will be taking questions
towards the end of their presentation
now if you'd like to join in the room
with us and
be able to actually ask the speakers
directly your questions
you can click the um button that says
join us on stage button below the player
and you can actually um immute yourself
turn on your camera and be part of the
session and ask the questions at the end
this will be an interactive 20-minute
session and we encourage you again
to to dive in and be interactive with us
lastly as many of you know at saster our
sessions
are recorded and will be available post
event
so without further ado i'd like to
introduce the sisu data team
peter and barrett you'll be taking it
over from here thanks so much
for being with us awesome thanks so much
for having us we're really excited to be
here today to talk a little about
some common pitfalls we find in terms of
building data-driven
companies especially on the path to
growth and opportunities do better and
what to do about them
so just by way of introduction my name
is peter i'm the ceo and founder of csu
before cc was on the faculty at stanford
and computer science where i worked on
making large amounts of data more useful
making ml more usable
and after shipping a bunch of the work
that we're doing at fairly large scale
and
at web services like facebook and google
and microsoft realized having more fun
shipping products than writing papers
here i am today and really excited to
share some of the lessons we've learned
along this journey both
from the academic perspective and from
the perspective of a fast-growing
analytics startup and founder seat and
i'm joined today by barrett hoffman who
leads product at csu
great great to be here thanks peter and
as peter said i lead product
at sisu and i'm personally really
excited for this conversation
for a couple reasons first uh a lot of
what we're going to be talking
about today in terms of some of the
challenges
and common pitfalls are things that i've
personally experienced
when growing and launching and leading
products at both really early stage
higher growth companies as well as at
scale
while i was at google so these are
challenges i personally felt and
that was a big motivator for me to join
sisu
and the second reason i'm really excited
is over the last year or so
during my time at csu we've spent a lot
of time i've probably at this point had
hundreds of conversations with customers
and through user research
really digging in to understand some of
the patterns that we're seeing
and i'm personally excited about the
opportunity to share some of the
insights from
those hundreds of conversations
awesome so what are we doing here at a
conference on growth talking about data
not a surprise hopefully to anyone in
the audience or listen this talk that
using data is critical to making the
right decisions along the path to
scaling up and
and especially when there are difficult
decisions and gut gut feel isn't
necessarily serving you
being able to look at all the data
you've got about your operations your
products your services your users
is critical and as barrett mentioned you
know we we we're based in this talk
based on experiences both in
prior lives and also working with
companies both very large like samsung
and also
getting very large like gusto and
the problem today is that making
decisions using data is actually pretty
hard
right uh if you take it from from
gartner one of the recent surveys
only 54 of leaders say that their
decisions are actually influenced by
data so that's barely more than half
and maybe more importantly and for many
of the audience you might also find
yourself in the camp of 73
of leaders saying that data hasn't had
the expected influence
this is all kind of funny given that if
you think about the rise of
data stack and companies like snowflake
we have more data
but somehow we're not putting it into
action question is what's going on
so our job today and if we do our job
correctly you'll
be able to leave this session with an
understanding of five key pitfalls we
find leaders falling into
and these aren't just one silver bullet
it's a blend of different
behaviors ranging from cultural to
processes
to tools where you think you can have
immediate impact
on your ability to operationalize your
data
great and i'm excited to kick it off
with this first bad habit which is
probably one of the most common ones
that we see
and it's the mistake of analyzing only a
portion of your data
and the way we typically refer to this
is you're only looking at the common
slices or the common slices and dices
that you already
probably know have an impact on your
business
and the challenge is this actually leads
to
really big missed opportunities in terms
of how you could be growing customers
and growing revenue
and as peter said uh in particular
given the additional data and and the
scale of cloud data infrastructure we
have more data
and so these missed opportunities
they're at your fingertips with this
additional data
now to give a little bit more tangible
example
of what we mean when we say only looking
at a portion of your data
this is an example from one of our csu
customers who's a
b2b sas provider and they were
experiencing or noticing
significant turn during a very critical
renewal month
for their business and the typical
approach for them was to look at
a factor or an attribute of customers
that they already knew had an important
influence
on churn rate and that was what
insurance provider the
customer was using that would have been
the typical way and unfortunately that
would have led to
actually missing some really key
insights that were hiding just a little
bit deeper
in the data that they already had
what we're really excited to see was
that with sisu they were able to
actually go beyond just that common
slice
that common uh dimension that they
already knew mattered
and they started looking at the other
attributes the other behaviors that
customers were taking
and not even just those additional
dimensions on their own
but actually combinations of those
dimensions so
looking at things like you know and
actually uncovering
that things like the number of employees
or specific features that customers were
engaging
in when you started to to bring in these
dimensions
and actually look at combinations of
them there were
really interesting more nuanced patterns
that were associated with higher or
lower churn
and by getting into those more nuanced
insights by going a little deeper
and using all of their data they were
actually able to create a much more
targeted and and as a result much more
effective
engagement strategy which for them
translated
to seven figures of additional retained
arr
so the takeaway here is a common bad
habit
is only looking at the pieces of your
data that you
already know matter and what we really
encourage
and what the best data teams are able to
do and the best companies are able to do
is actually go beyond those common
slices
and start looking at all of the actual
dimensions in your data and even the
combinations
so you get these more nuanced insights
another bad habit we often see is
treating your data teams like a report
factory
so no surprise to anyone here
there's a lot of questions you have
about your data they're often coming up
in
urgent times and the problem we often
find is that sending over requests
to an analytics team without giving the
shared business context or
strategic reason behind why a question
is being asked can lead to a lot of
wasted cycles making your job harder and
your
and your data teams job harder so common
scenario just to give you a concrete
example of this
uh i worked with the product leader who
was who just launched a new product very
excited to see
what was driving user engagement and
because of the complexity of both
the data involved and the user
behavioral patterns
waited weeks as opposed to days for
their analyst team to come back
with data about what was actually
driving engagement
problem is once they got the report back
from the data team
they found that the report contained
what features within the product were
leading to engagement but the question
that the product leader actually wanted
to know
was at what level of engagement these
features actually drove adoption
so they knew what features were
important and interesting they wanted to
know in their
ga when they moved this over to general
availability and open this up for a
self-service trial
what behaviors they wanted that they
should incentivize people to perform
should they invite three friends should
they invite five friends should they
sign up for three
uh subscriptions right they didn't get
the right granularity as a result
although a lot of this analysis had been
done took another round trip
to go back to the data team and go get
the actual right answers which is what
thresholds of activity
led to the appropriate user behavior and
by failing to align this business goal
up front
specifically tell me what thresholds are
needed in order to drive good
trial activity for the new product
experience this led to a lot of wasted
time and ultimately delayed decisions in
terms of what campaigns they want to run
in market
so the opportunity here is really much
more around process and culture which is
to the extent of what you can start
seeing your data team as business
partners
and involving them early you can ensure
you're getting these faster and more
actionable insights
and by aligning upfront about what these
insights look like what specific problem
you're trying to solve
and really kicking off projects together
versus treating the data team is
essentially only digging in when there's
a red alert or something that looks
really
wrong you can get the right answer the
first time as opposed to having to do
multiple iteration loops with them so in
summary
stop treating your data team like a
report factory instead involve the data
team early
and align up front on what results are
actually actionable to you and your
business
peter just talked about the importance
of not treating data teams like report
factory
at the same time we recognize that
reports are a critical part
of doing analysis and actually making
the insights
from your data actionable and
so this next bad habit we'll talk a
little bit about how to actually
approach those reports
acknowledging that they're a critical
part of the process
and one of the key insights that that we
see very commonly is so often the
questions
that come up that you're trying to dig
into your data to understand
they're not addressed by the pre-built
dashboards
that already exist and so what happens
is you end up spinning
spinning up pretty frequently these kind
of ad hoc or
situational analyses and when that
happens people jump into
excel or into writing sql or writing
python
uh to be able to answer these
situational questions
and when they do that they're jumping
into different tools uh
and and dispersing the work in a number
of places and a number of individuals
doing it
and each one is coming up with kind of
their own format of how to report the
results
and that makes it really hard to
interpret and orient
yourself to the results when the format
is changing all the time
and so to dig in a little bit more what
we see here was what's been really
interesting
is we hear this on kind of both sides of
business leaders people leading
functions like many of you all
listening in today people leading
functions like product or marketing or
sales or customer success
they're frustrated by the fact that
every time they get a report it's a
slightly different format
and they're really wishing there was a
more standardized way
on the flip side you've got data leaders
and analysts
who are actually saying that the
generation of those reports and having
to
do a lot of manual ad hoc work to
translate into all these different
formats is actually really
really frustrating and oftentimes one of
the most painful parts
so how can we address this challenge
our recommendation here is as early as
possible
really invest in and be intentional
about
what reporting formats make sense for
your business
and and your leadership team and then
try to standardize and encourage
people to use those common reports so
that you can become familiar with them
and as an example one common format that
we see
are these waterfall charts they're a
really effective way
to actually communicate in a concise
consumable fashion
what subgroups in the data for instance
actually what was the kind of
incremental impact of each of those
key drivers in going from you know one
value maybe
one period to the next period in the
metric so that's an example of the type
of format that you might want to
standardize on
so in summary we know that analyses
have to happen in a situational fashion
you have to respond as the business is
changing as
as everything in the market is changing
and when that happens it's really easy
to fall into this habit of
proliferating a number of different
reporting formats and
and not really standardizing and what we
encourage you to do instead is notice
that that's happening
and be intentional about establishing
those common formats
early once you've got a report output
there's another common
concern we see related to another bad
habit which is making it impossible to
actually ask
follow-up questions when you do get a
report whether that's standardized or
not
so we all know from getting a report
back that
follow-up questions are inevitable but
many times it's very hard for business
leaders to go and answer questions and
get a follow-up
especially if they have to involve their
data team so with data teams as a
critical bottleneck
many of these questions go unanswered
and this is a pain point on both sides
of the spectrum
so for many of you who are business
leaders you may
uh you know empathize with these with
these scenarios where
if something isn't immediately on the
dashboard report that i see
it takes too much time to go drill in i
don't know sequel i don't want to spend
my time writing sql
and if i have to get someone on the data
team to go do it it'll take too long so
i'm just not even going to ask that
follow-up question
and if you're a data leader if you work
with your data team they're probably
thinking something very
very similar but slightly different
where data leaders feel like these
follow-up questions could take up 100 of
their time if they
went and indulged each and every one of
them and they have to draw a line
because there's other things to go
and do so the opportunity here is really
one around process and tooling
so if you can enable your business team
to self-service based on the results
that are provided
you can allow many of these file
questions to go and get answers without
having to wait for an overloaded data
team
and it's not realistic that everyone on
the business side is going to become
a data analyst or a data team member but
we found that many of the follow-ups
that
data or that business leaders actually
want to ask of their data
are relatively simple variants of the
results have all been presented
so for example if your data team is
presenting a report on 14 day retention
making the report easily parameterizable
so you can go look at 28 day retention
and 60 day retention
or go look at other say other channels
and how their 14-day retention performs
can be really critical to contextualize
a given result and decide if there's
further analysis needed
or if you're ready to take an action and
the design pattern we found here
is really this idea of having a low
threshold and a lower barrier for entry
to do common manipulations and changes
to reporting
but also keep a high ceiling so those
data experts can go in
reconfigure go ask those follow-up
questions and if you can manage to do
this in the same environment
you can enable self-service for many of
the questions and only kick over the
most complex ones to your data team
so in summary here stop making follow-up
questions impossible for the business
and stop overloading your analyst team
with those follow-up questions as well
and start investing in tools that
empower your
business leaders to go and answer their
own questions
the last bad habit we're going to talk
about is probably the hardest to solve
but it's also
arguably the most important and
impactful to solve and
gesundheit peter um
so so the the challenge that we see here
is so much time
is spent analyzing and
trying to get to the answer that by the
time you actually get to the answer the
insight
it's too late to act and you're actually
missing opportunities the window closes
on
the chance to go and proactively retain
customers
or you know execute for example a
compelling go to market motion that
might be an additional
revenue growth opportunity what's
interesting about this habit is it's
something that we
see both at the earlier stage uh
you know higher growth earlier stage
companies as well as
at the common largest tech giants the
the typical thing
companies that we're all familiar with
and so the two quotes here the first one
is actually from
an analytics leader a data leader at
at one of these earlier stage higher
growth companies who is recognizing
sometimes we need the answer that day
and it just takes too long we needed
that day because customers are gonna
turn or
we're gonna miss that chance if we don't
get to it right away
and and recognizing the analysis becomes
worthless if it takes too long
and on the flip side this was a the
second quote is a product leader
at a large very very large technology
company who by the time they received
the results of the analysis and
identified
a specific very strategic customer that
was uh
based on their usage patterns was at
risk of churning
took a few days they called up the
customer and that person said
hey sorry i already already made the
decision it was too late
so what do we do about this this is
where
you know we really believe technology
needs to come in
and and play the role of accelerating
and even automating
the manual pieces of analysis so that
you get there faster
and can spend the time on on things that
are uniquely human
so to be a little more concrete what do
we mean about accelerating and
automating here
an example is you know we talked in the
first bad habit about
looking at all of your data not just a
portion of it
that's a great example where technology
can play a really critical role in
automating
looking at all of those different tens
or hundreds of millions or even billions
of different combinations that exist
you can leverage technology to automate
that and help you get
down to what's the narrower smaller set
of things i can really focus on
and then you as the expert from a
business perspective and really
understanding your business
you spend time on identifying which of
those things are
most actionable and then also executing
on those right doing the things that are
uniquely human picking up the phone
talking to customers executing a
cross-sell
campaign and actually getting into the
the action right that's actually going
to have an impact on the business
so again summary here don't spend all of
your time
analyzing right we have to run
businesses we need to we need to
act on the insights that we have
otherwise the analysis is worthless
and this is where technology can play a
really critical
role in accelerating and automating
those wrote manual pieces
so there you have it five bad habits in
data and and how to break them
these are informed by our experiences
both as product leaders
and as folks helping other product
leaders with
analytics on their path to growth and
the key thing i want to call out here is
as many things with scaling startups
there's no silver bullet here there's no
one weird trick to go and create a data
driven culture
but there are a lot of to borrow a ben
horowitz phrase
lead bullets that are very very useful
along the way
some of these are cultural some of these
are process oriented some of these are
tooling related
but with a combination of these we found
it's really possible to move beyond
aspiring to do more with data and
actually doing more with data
and in the spirit of this event our
really belief from seeing this over the
past several years
is that recognizing and breaking these
habits early can be the difference
between a successful outcome
and an iconic one that puts you on the
stage at saster and two
three four years from now so thank you
so much for your time bear and i would
love to take questions
awesome thanks so much we already have
quite a few questions in the queue so
i'm going to
get going um first question is
what do you think the most important
data habit to start
or break is for the early stage startup
peter do you want to jump in with a
first pass here yeah
um my my first one i would prioritize is
just treating that analyst team or that
data team as a report factory
i think that we've seen data and analyst
teams that are embedded in or have a lot
of context in the business
being more effective at knowing where to
make investments and how to give
not just give the right answers but
understand where to make additional
investments what other data to pull in
what other
products and functionality should they
be bringing into the internal tech stack
and especially the early in growth stage
being able to cement those
good data practices early and get those
wins around data which can rally people
the cause of additional investment in
data
um can be really critical so that
yeah yeah i'll add just one additional
thing which i think
uh so i actually agree with you peter i
think that's the most important and
one of the other reasons is that it sets
a
really important cultural norm that data
is a strategic doing analysis involving
data early when we're thinking about
business decisions is a strategic
imperative at our company
right next question what do you do when
the data doesn't support the anecdotal
things your business teams are hearing
on the front lines
what have you seen be a good way to
handle this
yeah so i'll add you know i think that's
a really challenging
one for sure and it's something that we
know people run into a lot
um one thing i've seen be effective here
is making sure that you're not skipping
over
the insights and the data that supports
maybe the
anecdotal or obvious thing so it can be
really easy to
jump and almost gloss over or ignore
the thing that the business leader maybe
already knows
is important and that causes them to
then say
well i already know this other thing is
important you're not telling me that
thing so how do i trust anything you're
saying
so that's probably my biggest piece of
advice there is don't gloss over the
obvious
ground yourself in the obvious build
that trust and credibility
and then move on to the less obvious as
an
additional point once you've established
that credibility
great i think we've got time for maybe
two more so we've got let me get let me
grab one here um
if you could only start with one what
habit would you
break first
that's that's good so i think this is in
in contrast to the first question which
i think was what do you focus on as kind
of a proactive
initiative first what if you've already
fell into some of these habits what do
you break first
um you know i think
probably the and this is you know
my gut here would be really getting
beyond only looking at the portion
of your data i think that is something
that is like i said probably one of the
most common pitfalls
and it's something that is is really
important to break
because you're investing in getting a
lot of data you're investing
in getting that data into probably
a cloud data warehouse that you can in
theory
do analysis on it and so i think the
biggest
impact you're going to have is if you
can go beyond hey we're only looking at
a portion of all this data that we're
investing in in getting ready for
analysis we're only looking at a portion
at it if you can really start to look at
all of it that's probably the
the first thing and i think the most um
actionable
thing that we talked about today
excellent okay last one we've gotta and
then we'll have to wrap this up and
we'll send you the other questions
so you have them what's one tactical
practical way
to show the power of being data driven
to get
the naysayers to change their mind